<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III: Eustacia Dresses Herself on a Black Morning</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-5" id="chapter-5-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">Eustacia Dresses Herself on a Black Morning</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>A consciousness of a vast impassivity in all which lay around him took possession even of Yeobright in his wild walk towards Alderworth. He had once before felt in his own person this overpowering of the fervid by the inanimate; but then it had tended to enervate a passion far sweeter than that which at present pervaded him. It was once when he stood parting from Eustacia in the moist still levels beyond the hills.</p>
			<p>But dismissing all this he went onward home, and came to the front of his house. The blinds of Eustacia‚Äôs bedroom were still closely drawn, for she was no early riser. All the life visible was in the shape of a solitary thrush cracking a small snail upon the door-stone for his breakfast, and his tapping seemed a loud noise in the general silence which prevailed; but on going to the door Clym found it unfastened, the young girl who attended upon Eustacia being astir in the back part of the premises. Yeobright entered and went straight to his wife‚Äôs room.</p>
			<p>The noise of his arrival must have aroused her, for when he opened the door she was standing before the looking glass in her nightdress, the ends of her hair gathered into one hand, with which she was coiling the whole mass round her head, previous to beginning toilette operations. She was not a woman given to speaking first at a meeting, and she allowed Clym to walk across in silence, without turning her head. He came behind her, and she saw his face in the glass. It was ashy, haggard, and terrible. Instead of starting towards him in sorrowful surprise, as even Eustacia, undemonstrative wife as she was, would have done in days before she burdened herself with a secret, she remained motionless, looking at him in the glass. And while she looked the carmine flush with which warmth and sound sleep had suffused her cheeks and neck, dissolved from view, and the deathlike pallor in his face flew across into hers. He was close enough to see this, and the sight instigated his tongue.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou know what is the matter,‚Äù he said huskily. ‚ÄúI see it in your face.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Her hand relinquished the rope of hair and dropped to her side, and the pile of tresses, no longer supported, fell from the crown of her head about her shoulders and over the white nightgown. She made no reply.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSpeak to me,‚Äù said Yeobright peremptorily.</p>
			<p>The blanching process did not cease in her, and her lips now became as white as her face. She turned to him and said, ‚ÄúYes, Clym, I‚Äôll speak to you. Why do you return so early? Can I do anything for you?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, you can listen to me. It seems that my wife is not very well?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYour face, my dear; your face. Or perhaps it is the pale morning light which takes your colour away? Now I am going to reveal a secret to you. Ha-ha!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúO, that is ghastly!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYour laugh.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere‚Äôs reason for ghastliness. Eustacia; you have held my happiness in the hollow of your hand, and like a devil you have dashed it down!‚Äù</p>
			<p>She started back from the dressing-table, retreated a few steps from him, and looked him in the face. ‚ÄúAh! you think to frighten me,‚Äù she said, with a slight laugh. ‚ÄúIs it worth while? I am undefended, and alone.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHow extraordinary!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat do you mean?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAs there is ample time I will tell you, though you know well enough. I mean that it is extraordinary that you should be alone in my absence. Tell me, now, where is he who was with you on the afternoon of the thirty-first of August? Under the bed? Up the chimney?‚Äù</p>
			<p>A shudder overcame her and shook the light fabric of her nightdress throughout. ‚ÄúI do not remember dates so exactly,‚Äù she said. ‚ÄúI cannot recollect that anybody was with me besides yourself.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe day I mean,‚Äù said Yeobright, his voice growing louder and harsher, ‚Äúwas the day you shut the door against my mother and killed her. O, it is too much‚ÅÝ‚Äîtoo bad!‚Äù He leant over the footpiece of the bedstead for a few moments, with his back towards her; then rising again‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄúTell me, tell me! tell me‚ÅÝ‚Äîdo you hear?‚Äù he cried, rushing up to her and seizing her by the loose folds of her sleeve.</p>
			<p>The superstratum of timidity which often overlies those who are daring and defiant at heart had been passed through, and the mettlesome substance of the woman was reached. The red blood inundated her face, previously so pale.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat are you going to do?‚Äù she said in a low voice, regarding him with a proud smile. ‚ÄúYou will not alarm me by holding on so; but it would be a pity to tear my sleeve.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Instead of letting go he drew her closer to him. ‚ÄúTell me the particulars of‚ÅÝ‚Äîmy mother‚Äôs death,‚Äù he said in a hard, panting whisper; ‚Äúor‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI‚Äôll‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI‚Äôll‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúClym,‚Äù she answered slowly, ‚Äúdo you think you dare do anything to me that I dare not bear? But before you strike me listen. You will get nothing from me by a blow, even though it should kill me, as it probably will. But perhaps you do not wish me to speak‚ÅÝ‚Äîkilling may be all you mean?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúKill you! Do you expect it?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI do.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo less degree of rage against me will match your previous grief for her.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPhew‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI shall not kill you,‚Äù he said contemptuously, as if under a sudden change of purpose. ‚ÄúI did think of it; but‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI shall not. That would be making a martyr of you, and sending you to where she is; and I would keep you away from her till the universe come to an end, if I could.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI almost wish you would kill me,‚Äù said she with gloomy bitterness. ‚ÄúIt is with no strong desire, I assure you, that I play the part I have lately played on earth. You are no blessing, my husband.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou shut the door‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou looked out of the window upon her‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou had a man in the house with you‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou sent her away to die. The inhumanity‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe treachery‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI will not touch you‚ÅÝ‚Äîstand away from me‚ÅÝ‚Äîand confess every word!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNever! I‚Äôll hold my tongue like the very death that I don‚Äôt mind meeting, even though I can clear myself of half you believe by speaking. Yes. I will! Who of any dignity would take the trouble to clear cobwebs from a wild man‚Äôs mind after such language as this? No; let him go on, and think his narrow thoughts, and run his head into the mire. I have other cares.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚Äú‚Ää‚ÄôTis too much‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut I must spare you.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPoor charity.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBy my wretched soul you sting me, Eustacia! I can keep it up, and hotly too. Now, then, madam, tell me his name!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNever, I am resolved.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHow often does he write to you? Where does he put his letters‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhen does he meet you? Ah, his letters! Do you tell me his name?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI do not.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThen I‚Äôll find it myself.‚Äù His eyes had fallen upon a small desk that stood near, on which she was accustomed to write her letters. He went to it. It was locked.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúUnlock this!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou have no right to say it. That‚Äôs mine.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Without another word he seized the desk and dashed it to the floor. The hinge burst open, and a number of letters tumbled out.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúStay!‚Äù said Eustacia, stepping before him with more excitement than she had hitherto shown.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCome, come! stand away! I must see them.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She looked at the letters as they lay, checked her feeling and moved indifferently aside; when he gathered them up, and examined them.</p>
			<p>By no stretch of meaning could any but a harmless construction be placed upon a single one of the letters themselves. The solitary exception was an empty envelope directed to her, and the handwriting was Wildeve‚Äôs. Yeobright held it up. Eustacia was doggedly silent.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCan you read, madam? Look at this envelope. Doubtless we shall find more soon, and what was inside them. I shall no doubt be gratified by learning in good time what a well-finished and full-blown adept in a certain trade my lady is.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo you say it to me‚ÅÝ‚Äîdo you?‚Äù she gasped.</p>
			<p>He searched further, but found nothing more. ‚ÄúWhat was in this letter?‚Äù he said.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAsk the writer. Am I your hound that you should talk to me in this way?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo you brave me? do you stand me out, mistress? Answer. Don‚Äôt look at me with those eyes as if you would bewitch me again! Sooner than that I die. You refuse to answer?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI wouldn‚Äôt tell you after this, if I were as innocent as the sweetest babe in heaven!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhich you are not.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCertainly I am not absolutely,‚Äù she replied. ‚ÄúI have not done what you suppose; but if to have done no harm at all is the only innocence recognized, I am beyond forgiveness. But I require no help from your conscience.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou can resist, and resist again! Instead of hating you I could, I think, mourn for and pity you, if you were contrite, and would confess all. Forgive you I never can. I don‚Äôt speak of your lover‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI will give you the benefit of the doubt in that matter, for it only affects me personally. But the other: had you half-killed <em>me</em>, had it been that you wilfully took the sight away from these feeble eyes of mine, I could have forgiven you. But <em>that‚Äôs</em> too much for nature!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSay no more. I will do without your pity. But I would have saved you from uttering what you will regret.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI am going away now. I shall leave you.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou need not go, as I am going myself. You will keep just as far away from me by staying here.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCall her to mind‚ÅÝ‚Äîthink of her‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhat goodness there was in her: it showed in every line of her face! Most women, even when but slightly annoyed, show a flicker of evil in some curl of the mouth or some corner of the cheek; but as for her, never in her angriest moments was there anything malicious in her look. She was angered quickly, but she forgave just as readily, and underneath her pride there was the meekness of a child. What came of it?‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhat cared you? You hated her just as she was learning to love you. O! couldn‚Äôt you see what was best for you, but must bring a curse upon me, and agony and death upon her, by doing that cruel deed! What was the fellow‚Äôs name who was keeping you company and causing you to add cruelty to her to your wrong to me? Was it Wildeve? Was it poor Thomasin‚Äôs husband? Heaven, what wickedness! Lost your voice, have you? It is natural after detection of that most noble trick.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Eustacia, didn‚Äôt any tender thought of your own mother lead you to think of being gentle to mine at such a time of weariness? Did not one grain of pity enter your heart as she turned away? Think what a vast opportunity was then lost of beginning a forgiving and honest course. Why did not you kick him out, and let her in, and say, I‚Äôll be an honest wife and a noble woman from this hour? Had I told you to go and quench eternally our last flickering chance of happiness here you could have done no worse. Well, she‚Äôs asleep now; and have you a hundred gallants, neither they nor you can insult her any more.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou exaggerate fearfully,‚Äù she said in a faint, weary voice; ‚Äúbut I cannot enter into my defence‚ÅÝ‚Äîit is not worth doing. You are nothing to me in future, and the past side of the story may as well remain untold. I have lost all through you, but I have not complained. Your blunders and misfortunes may have been a sorrow to you, but they have been a wrong to me. All persons of refinement have been scared away from me since I sank into the mire of marriage. Is this your cherishing‚ÅÝ‚Äîto put me into a hut like this, and keep me like the wife of a hind? You deceived me‚ÅÝ‚Äînot by words, but by appearances, which are less seen through than words. But the place will serve as well as any other‚ÅÝ‚Äîas somewhere to pass from‚ÅÝ‚Äîinto my grave.‚Äù Her words were smothered in her throat, and her head drooped down.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt know what you mean by that. Am I the cause of your sin?‚Äù (Eustacia made a trembling motion towards him.) ‚ÄúWhat, you can begin to shed tears and offer me your hand? Good God! can you? No, not I. I‚Äôll not commit the fault of taking that.‚Äù (The hand she had offered dropped nervelessly, but the tears continued flowing.) ‚ÄúWell, yes, I‚Äôll take it, if only for the sake of my own foolish kisses that were wasted there before I knew what I cherished. How bewitched I was! How could there be any good in a woman that everybody spoke ill of?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúO, O, O!‚Äù she cried, breaking down at last; and, shaking with sobs which choked her, she sank upon her knees. ‚ÄúO, will you have done! O, you are too relentless‚ÅÝ‚Äîthere‚Äôs a limit to the cruelty of savages! I have held out long‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut you crush me down. I beg for mercy‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI cannot bear this any longer‚ÅÝ‚Äîit is inhuman to go further with this! If I had‚ÅÝ‚Äîkilled your‚ÅÝ‚Äîmother with my own hand‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI should not deserve such a scourging to the bone as this. O, O! God have mercy upon a miserable woman!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ You have beaten me in this game‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI beg you to stay your hand in pity!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ I confess that I‚ÅÝ‚Äîwilfully did not undo the door the first time she knocked‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI should have unfastened it the second‚ÅÝ‚Äîif I had not thought you had gone to do it yourself. When I found you had not I opened it, but she was gone. That‚Äôs the extent of my crime‚ÅÝ‚Äîtowards <em>her</em>. Best natures commit bad faults sometimes, don‚Äôt they?‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI think they do. Now I will leave you‚ÅÝ‚Äîforever and ever!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTell all, and I <em>will</em> pity you. Was the man in the house with you Wildeve?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI cannot tell,‚Äù she said desperately through her sobbing. ‚ÄúDon‚Äôt insist further‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI cannot tell. I am going from this house. We cannot both stay here.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou need not go: I will go. You can stay here.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, I will dress, and then I will go.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhere?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhere I came from, or <em>else</em>where.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She hastily dressed herself, Yeobright moodily walking up and down the room the whole of the time. At last all her things were on. Her little hands quivered so violently as she held them to her chin to fasten her bonnet that she could not tie the strings, and after a few moments she relinquished the attempt. Seeing this he moved forward and said, ‚ÄúLet me tie them.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She assented in silence, and lifted her chin. For once at least in her life she was totally oblivious of the charm of her attitude. But he was not, and he turned his eyes aside, that he might not be tempted to softness.</p>
			<p>The strings were tied; she turned from him. ‚ÄúDo you still prefer going away yourself to my leaving you?‚Äù he inquired again.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI do.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúVery well‚ÅÝ‚Äîlet it be. And when you will confess to the man I may pity you.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She flung her shawl about her and went downstairs, leaving him standing in the room.</p>
			<p>Eustacia had not long been gone when there came a knock at the door of the bedroom; and Yeobright said, ‚ÄúWell?‚Äù</p>
			<p>It was the servant; and she replied, ‚ÄúSomebody from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝWildeve‚Äôs have called to tell ‚Äôee that the mis‚Äôess and the baby are getting on wonderful well, and the baby‚Äôs name is to be Eustacia Clementine.‚Äù And the girl retired.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat a mockery!‚Äù said Clym. ‚ÄúThis unhappy marriage of mine to be perpetuated in that child‚Äôs name!‚Äù</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
