<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Preface</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter">
		<section id="preface" epub:type="preface">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Preface</h2>
			<p>The date at which the following events are assumed to have occurred may be set down as between 1840 and 1850, when the old watering place herein called “Budmouth” still retained sufficient afterglow from its Georgian gaiety and prestige to lend it an absorbing attractiveness to the romantic and imaginative soul of a lonely dweller inland.</p>
			<p>Under the general name of “Egdon Heath,” which has been given to the sombre scene of the story, are united or typified heaths of various real names, to the number of at least a dozen; these being virtually one in character and aspect, though their original unity, or partial unity, is now somewhat disguised by intrusive strips and slices brought under the plough with varying degrees of success, or planted to woodland.</p>
			<p>It is pleasant to dream that some spot in the extensive tract whose southwestern quarter is here described, may be the heath of that traditionary King of Wessex⁠—Lear.</p>
			<footer>
				<p>July 1895.</p>
			</footer>
			<section id="postscript" epub:type="z3998:postscript">
				<header>
					<p>Postscript</p>
				</header>
				<p>To prevent disappointment to searchers for scenery it should be added that though the action of the narrative is supposed to proceed in the central and most secluded part of the heaths united into one whole, as above described, certain topographical features resembling those delineated really lie on the margin of the waste, several miles to the westward of the centre. In some other respects also there has been a bringing together of scattered characteristics.</p>
				<p>I may mention here in answer to inquiries that the Christian name of “Eustacia,” borne by the heroine of the story, was that of the Lady of the Manor of Ower Moigne, in the reign of Henry the Fourth, which parish includes part of the “Egdon Heath” of the following pages.</p>
				<p>The first edition of this novel was published in three volumes in 1878.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:signature">
						<abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">T. H.</abbr>
					</p>
					<p>April 1912.</p>
				</footer>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
